one of the reasons I bring my girlfriend
on camera is that even she could stop
but she doesn't have a lot to say about
some she jumps in with questions that
take the video in the direction the last
video I made about Buddhism I thought
was gonna be about 10 minutes long we
did a solid half hour and yeah I know I
know afterwards you said oh you barely
said anything but the few sentences you
put in actually did help it take on a
new direction so for this video also I
think what I have to say is really
simple but I think a lot of ways the
tone is improved by having me explain it
to someone else
someone who's have been outsider to
Buddhism and she can jump in anytime we
didn't prep this it's not like I you
know sit out like oh don't ask about
this or that it's nothing there's no no
restrictions on what direction the
conversation going the video I made
immediately before this one a couple
days ago now right but the video I
uploaded before this one asked and
answer the question of whether or not
Buddhism is compatible with atheism and
that's a pretty well warm topic and then
we gave practical advice and discussions
on becoming a Buddhist layperson or
becoming a Buddhist monk and what the
religion means today a contrast to what
it was in the past the video wanted to
make now is instead talking about
Buddhism and nihilism and is really more
explicitly about the future of the
religion because I think those are
issues that were raised for me at least
for us by reporting that that earlier
video now I have held back from ever
making a youtube video that really laid
down the law on how meditation is
I think I might have a video
that's actually titled meditating I've
some stuff that comes pretty close to
that but you know there's this
demi-monde out there you look like you
want to say something jump in oh ya know
so I've written articles about this
stuff too but I mean there's this whole
demi-monde that sprouted out of really
really pseudoscience
with the word pseudoscience is overused
but there is a lot of pseudoscience
claiming that meditation has medical
benefits and mental benefits and I got
to tell you part of the magic of this
pseudoscience is the public
misunderstanding of what peer review is
and what peer review means yes these are
peer-reviewed journal articles but you
have to actually read them you have to
read the footnotes you have to break it
down you have to do the work and do the
math and when you do you find out what
complete it is so you know now
first I don't want to do cress too much
on the history nature of peer-review I
think it is sad it's a big issue think
of who are the peers yes are you talking
about maybe three people normally one
senior editor into peer reviewers and
that's it that's the whole process so no
there's only one referee and one senior
edit and that's it now if you are
publishing in a journal of Catholic
studies where all of the senior scholars
the editors the reviewers where they are
all either Catholic priests or very
devout Catholic scholars who devoted
their lives that's religion you can
imagine what kind of bias you're facing
from the reviewers in the review process
if you want to publish something that's
critical of the Catholic establishment
or vice versa
you know I mean like that very oh why is
it people blind themselves they kind of
have one eye open when they think about
Buddhism this way I think the bias in
buddhism totosai is much much stronger
you know and I've dealt with it I dealt
with that I could now launch into ten
different examples about peer review
doesn't work with them but it studies
but I've never been involved in Catholic
studies I'm sure there are people with
years experience in that area and
they'll talk about how peer review
doesn't doesn't work but this is the
first thing like you often have a
devoted journal which isn't just
entirely staffed by people who are pro
Buddhist fanatics but it's a journal
devoted to presenting pseudo scientific
arguments that Buddhist meditation has
medical benefits if that specific bias
everyone involved in it
so obviously peer review becomes
meaningless now the type of tests of the
type of medical testing involved is very
often meaning also give you an example
this is a real example that I have been
through a pair of peer-reviewed medical
articles dealing with where they have
people meditate and then test them on
their ability to remember a series of
random three-digit numbers so like you
have a control group you have a
meditating group and you see who is
better you know over time
after several meditation sessions have
you when someone sits there unreasonable
series number 326 147 you know 928 and
then the person has to sit there and how
many numbers were they able to memorize
now especially when it stated in vague
probably latin terms what this what this
you know this is a test of increased
cognitive ability or something you can
make this sound really exciting you know
and you're looking at the difference
between a group of people who sat and
meditated a group of people who did a
placebo group who did some other
activity now what we what is the
connection between this this specific
type of cognitive ability and what's
actually written into Buddhism as an
ancient religious tradition this is one
part of the problem like the Buddha
didn't promise that if you did this
meditation exercise you get better at
reciting numbers and memorizing and
reciting it's not supposed to make you
better at math it's not supposed to
improve your memory so that has that
effect it's meaningless from a dogmatic
standpoint I mean dogmatic that says
that are caring about the doctrine of
the original religion this is wildly
spurious what Buddhism is supposed to be
as the Buddha taught it as the Buddha
sit down and say the same by the way
about Christian prayer like if we prove
that as a Catholic if you do some kind
of traditional Christian prayer and then
try to memorize a bunch of numbers you
know maybe it works you know it's been
research on that sure by the honor
I'm not even skeptical but I don't know
maybe when you pray as a Catholic maybe
it kind of focuses your mind yeah a
little bit better at math yeah you know
again the differences that you're
measuring are not that big it's not like
people become math geniuses if they did
we do this crap before writing you know
math exams like if it were really
effective you know people studying for
the SAT and the GRE there'd be okay
let's talk about this who would really
be doing Buddhist meditation before do
they even really know it's you it's this
tiny measurable difference
and the other point is look it's a false
placebo group in the following sense
possible savings what you'd really want
to compare it to is how much can you
improve your math ability if you
actually do math training with the same
a long time instead of spending six
hours a week meditating what if I did
six hours a week of training with an
abacus or on the chalk board or with a
math instructor doing exercises if it's
about math ability that's not and none
of them want to say another want to say
you straight up this is how much people
improve their ability to memorize a
bunch of random numbers no no it's you
know they're going to use some fancy
term some particular form of cognitive
reasoning improvement and you have to
get there right yeah yeah and you have
to get in and really read the fine print
and the methodology and say wait what
was the test
what was it test and what was the person
you got you've really can't let them get
with anything so this is there's a whole
literature filmed this kind of crap and
even then and the tests that are related
to improvements in mood like so they
also these ways of measuring like does
meditate and calm you down now again
that's already doctrinally unsound its
dogmatic land sound this the Buddha
didn't teach this stuff there wasn't the
pally can and the ancient scriptures he
didn't teach the stuff to calm you down
and improve your bourgeois or existence
as an architect or a stockbroker that's
not the point of this minute is not
what's for them so if it calms you down
its kind of nice but you know I read one
study it was it was cited heavily in a
guy's PhD thesis so I was going through
this study and when you compare it to
the placebo group and you know these
again these are inherently corrupt tests
they're obviously set up just to try to
prove that put his meditation improves
your mood it calms you down and makes
you makes you feel better but the
placebo group they didn't have them do
nothing
they had them spend the same amount of
time listening to an audio book
listening to a recording with a British
accent
the BBC version of The Hobbit
oh my j.r.r tolkien which is apparently
it's quite a calming you know I mean
it's in the people who listen to the
audio book they had more of the benefits
of meditation
than the people were
this stuff you're measuring again like
you know it's not the amount of
difference amount of cognitive and
emotional impact is smaller than the
emotional impact of sitting and
listening to a good audio book I assume
it's gone it no maybe you you know if
you like The Hobbit you know what I mean
maybe you hate it
maybe you listen to the Hobby kind of
real pissed-off gun that Gandalf well
you know that maybe you feel it's really
badly written Isley I mean I guess
different audiobooks but but this stuff
we're measuring is is so miserable so
we're living in an era when you know
Buddhism has been appropriated in an
ancient philosophy and ancient religion
and it's been appropriated into a modern
or postmodern culture of pseudoscience
that's he tried to repackage and
redefine you know what meditation is and
sell it I mean people are making money
out of this oh yeah what a university or
something or in an actual temple so
there was no but there is it's as if
it's part of physical health for us to
sit there for a half hour and say right
well we then positivity breathe out
negativity right and this this is not
done this is not done with comp with
Catholic prayer that's also inner I mean
you could your gym could have a Catholic
prayer room yeah but somehow some kind
of mix of Hindu and Buddhist
presuppositions about meditation have
been modernized and bastardized and you
know wrapped up with this kind of pseudo
scientific claim and we say it's healthy
right I mean I I would like to see
studies for you know meditation versus
prayer because with prayers you're
praying for whatever is going on in your
life and you know it's I don't know if
it's really those like prayer is worship
and so on yes yes right so you know
people prayed for your to do well on the
math test nice right so like actually
somebody maybe you know I don't know how
they compare anyway yeah nobody may be
maybe first better in terms of
motivating you or something you know if
it's if it's about you know doing trying
your hardest or something you know that
psychiatrist psychiatrist not psychology
you know robert jay lifton he did some
work on that you know like the extent to
which people can get themselves psyched
up against the interim through you know
different types of positive thinking and
which would include and indeed prayer or
what-have-you
I mean historically people used to pray
before going into battle in war or so
you know anyway yeah the point is this
is all on a spectrum of complete
okay I'm not telling you this because I
think Catholic prayer is good but it's
also good I think all of the attempts to
modernize this and scientifically
rationalize this are a really dangerous
form of pseudoscience that ruins
people's lives and it's even ruining the
religion of Buddhism I mean this video
isn't really from that perspective this
is more of a nihilistic perspective but
you can totally come on and speak from
an orthodox tear about it but disrespect
and say look this is what the Buddha
taught this is why you thought that this
is what what matters about it and you
people are destroying it for nickels and
dimes you guys are turning it into this
cheap get-rich-quick scheme take you
know middle-aged stockbroker who
stressed out and promised them that
you're gonna solve all his problems
you're gonna stop his marriage from
falling apart you're gonna stop him
suffering from post-traumatic stress
disorder you know you're gonna go into
prisons and teach Buddhist meditation of
prisoners and they're gonna stop being
violent offenders really really you want
to do the social science research on how
effective that is I mean or what or
you're gonna take kids they're gonna be
better at math they're gonna increase
their cognitive ability like there are
people really seriously claim the
Buddhist meditation is gonna increase
your intelligence and this kind of thing
and they'll point to exactly these kinds
of studies like oh well you know they're
gamma 4 score increased this much and
you got to look at the footnotes okay
what the hell was the game of what was
it actually measuring what was you know
okay but yeah and obviously there were
been whole Institute set up of this
especially by Hindus there have been a
lot of Hindu groups really trying to
prove that Transcendental Meditation
especially had some kind of positive
outcome believe me if they could show
with a tiniest increase in your IQ like
any objective test like that not saying
the IQ is a flawless test let me know it
is what it is
believe me they'd be out there these
snake oil salesmen
you know pushing that factoid you know
any little tiny improvement you
in the human mind that's visual so look
the big difference between me and other
voices in the internet about modernizing
Buddhism and secularizing Buddhism and
reinvigorating of anybody and the reason
this video is structure the way it is is
let me tell you if you want to have a
break between the traditional and the
modern meditation has to be thrown out
hey I think that's the fundamental to me
most of the people a lot of what we seen
go on with the so-called modernization
of Buddhism was a recognition of well
people these days aren't into demons
people these days aren't into spirit
possession you know many people aren't
aren't into you know healing faith
healing as much as they used to be that
used to be a huge part of Buddhism all
caught this American Civil War veteran
who was a huge part of this tree of
Buddhism that's right that's right he's
the guy designed the flag for
international flag for Buddhism and so
on he traveled around Sri Lanka as a
faith healer novices that was his claim
to fame that's how he builds reputation
anyway faith healing is out of style
demon demons are out of style the idea
that there's a giant magical mountain in
the middle of the world and the gods are
living at the top of that mountain there
are a lot of things that are not gonna
make it anymore but what they've tried
to do is have this kind of you know
pared down aesthetically modernized
Buddhism that is based on selling you
know cynical misrepresent heard me
cynical misrepresentations of what
authentic historical meditative
practices were and you know basically
promising people whatever it is they
want to hear in terms of the presumed
outcomes of this meditation there's a
lot there's a lot of cognitive
dissonance on this issue it's really sad
dealing people face to face on this
issue whether they're Buddhist monks
scholars the PhD or narrate true
believers but like you know I knew one
guy I guess I won't name him and he was
teaching at Oxford England so he was a
teacher not quite a professor at Austria
and his position was that there is
nothing in the Pali Canon about
and heard that from other fuel before I
remember talking with actually very
senior but it's monk about this and I
said why do you think it is that there
are these white people who go around
saying there's nothing about meditation
in the Buddhist Canon you don't I mean
and you know the reality is these are
people who had a fixed notion in their
own minds of what they wanted meditation
to be and then when they looked at the
ancient texts they didn't find it right
but long story short the meditative
experience in the Pala Canon which has
completely routed to the Nirvana that's
this is what Nirvana is in effect on the
one hand it's tearing up desire by its
roots that's part of the definition of
Nirvana that's part of what's supposed
to happen with meditation is eliminating
the human capacity to feel desire which
none of those people at your gym at the
YMCA or something they're not going to
mention that they're not gonna say yes
if you meditate correctly in the
Buddhist tradition you'll never you'll
never feel sexual desire there's gonna
destroy your sex drive and probably food
won't really taste good either you'll
become indifferent to the difference
between delicious and or a whole thing
you know food a little taste bland
because you will torn out desire by its
roots you know you don't hear that at
all in this kind of secularized
popularized version of it but you do
some Buddhist monks in modernizing but
as including Thailand's but at that a K
but a dasa they tried to put renewed
emphasis on that side of the equation
because that's the less supernatural
side almost quoting buddha dasa
word-for-word here to say he said
whatever one ignores whatever wants to
forget is that nirvana fundamentally and
buddhist meditation leading up to
nirvana
he is a method for eliminating desire
that's what it is
[Music]
so that's one side of it but then the
other side of it which again some people
emphasize and some people are in a cut
state a cardan distance about is a
highly supernatural experience of
remembering your former incarnations
going through a series of hallucinatory
states which are all listed off and
described in sufficient detail not in
great detail frankly in the Pali Canon
in the para we can and we also have I
mean hallucinations are not uniform two
different people are going to loosen any
different ways so we also have debates
between Buddhist monks who had different
memories of or different impressions of
these close Satori States or what have
you but yeah it involves having
visions in that sense which again so my
point is here if we're really being
honest about the potential for Buddhism
to adapt and endure in the 21st century
in the 22nd century what most of the
other modernizers have said is that
meditation will become the core of
Buddhism that maybe a scientist a
scientist ik version of meditation
meditation for a family that this is
this is going to be the one element that
endures from 2005 and years ago into the
next century and that they'd get rid of
the mythological aspects I really feel
the opposite way I think we have to look
at past present future of Buddhism say
look the mythology still has value if we
regard it as mythology no I mean like
nobody's really complaining that
Shakespeare isn't true you know I mean
like the problem with Shakespeare isn't
that it's fiction well it's I agree that
what I've read from the Bible is just
sure like Noah's Ark compared to
something else but it's not even really
disputed that Buddhism has this place
you know in the world's literature and
world's philosophy we've got kind of a
space in the library shelf reserved for
us that you know this is some of the
world's greatest literature some of the
world's greatest philosophy but the myth
the mythology is just knowledge you know
but I mean like I don't think you're
gonna you know again carry this on at
the future by pretending these things
are portraying real historical events
you know real magical events or real
miracles you know I mean that's that's
never gonna endure the weakness of the
Bible is I think if you don't believe
the miracles are real the story has no
interest you know what I mean what
what's the point of Noah's Ark if you
you know if it's just a story what's the
point of look at the acts of the Saints
and the New Testament is false for I
mean Buddhism absolutely can endure and
thrive with the mythology being
recognized as mythology that literature
being recognized as literature the
history being recognized as history and
the philosophy being recognized as just
philosophy and you know philosophy gives
rise to new philosophy I've never seen
philosophy and straight-up Dogma you
mean with a straight religious diversity
up that's the Bible and now it's
nobody can add another book nobody can
add a new chapter to the Bible right but
philosophy is always open there can be
new ideas and new critiques and new
directions and new discoveries or what
have you but in terms of the very messy
attempts to separate the supernatural
from what's productive and useful moving
Fortin Buddhism all of them have tried
to save meditation right and in doing so
I think if they've made themselves
ridiculous you know it's a false first
step or then you can never met it's a
usurper you can you can never modernize
you can never move forward because
you're you're really preserving what I
think is the most most embarrassing okay
so I think that's enough for one video
20 minutes already there's a long
history of nihilists trying to
appropriate Buddhism there's a long
history of books I remember cuz I didn't
just look at literature in English there
were books in French and Spanish also
with titles like Buddhism ah the Neely's
easy a teak you know like Buddhism the
the nihilism of Asia or something you
know I mean there were a lot of temps
yeah there was a lot of interest in
people in emphasizing so-called
existential and nihilistic aspects of
Buddhism there have been a lot attempts
to try to reimagine the history of
Buddhism as if originally in its
pristine State when it's first degrees
it was more nihilistic and then the the
other superstitious and folklore
elements were later added on or later
accretions on top of a nihilistic core
all that's you know
Buddhism needs to be appreciated in the
same way we appreciate Socrates or
Aristotle or Plato or what-have-you
it's a really ancient it reflects really
alien assumptions about life from a very
ancient whole you know the totally
different perspective on reality and
morality and everything else but in the
same way it's not like you know if
you're reading Aristotle you find
something you disagree with hey forget
it
you cooperate against all there's what
possible good you know one of the exam
you know Aristotle's opinion on on the
status of women there's actually quite
debatable he says different things about
relation stream women and men some
people feel he's really uh
certain on a misanthrope not a miss
Andrus some people feel thank you that's
what she's here for
misogynist idea where I think it's you
know but hey what Aristotle says about
slavery you know whatever you know the
point of reading Aristotle is not either
slavishly agree with you it's not to
convert to Aristotelian ism or to reject
it and say I'm against Aristotle me
neither this is why again I'm framing
these terms of nihilism I as a nihilist
can read Aristotle and find some value
in it whether you call that historical
value literary value philosophical value
you know whatever it is and we can move
forward you know what I mean Buddhism's
got to get itself into that position and
play in that Lane and you're making
yourself ridiculous by trying to take
things like meditation that were
originally magical and hallucinatory and
saying the magic is real trying to make
it out that these tiny differences in
test scores or what have you we are
going to preserve that magic for another
century as something that mmm the common
public is going to believe I am out